# Delano

## Introduction

Once the heart of farm labor organizing and the birthplace of the United Farm Workers labor union, the City of Delano, in California's verdant San Joaquin Valley, is host to three prisons, whose combined population accounts for around 16-20% of the city's roughly 53,000 residents[@department_of_corrections_and_rehabilitation_state_of_california_monthly_2016; @us_census_bureau_profile_2010; @department_of_corrections_and_rehabilitation_state_of_california_monthly_2011]. The City's transition from being a hub of union labor to one of prisons emblematizes broader shifts in the state's and country's political economy with the erosion of the Keynesian welfare state into a permanent crisis workfare-welfare state.[@gilmore_golden_2007] Where capital's demand for manual farm labor once made brown bodies indispensable to the creation of profit, the unemployment rate now hovers around XX%, nearly 3 times the statewide average (citation). Horrifyingly, and yet unsurprisingly, these populations, rendered surplus within the local economy, live in the county which, in 2005, had the highest per capita rate of people killed by law enforcement officers anywhere in the US.[@swaine_county_2015] How might we begin to account for the changes that have occurred in Delano and across the South San Joaquin Valley? In this chapter, I examine the relationships between the state, capital, labor, and environmental policy that facilitated and resisted social and environmental changes in Delano over the past 150 years, culminating with the construction of the City's third detention facility in 2005. I also foreground one particular site of resistance to this narrative, situated within the conditions for its possibility, the racial environmental state. [@department_of_corrections_and_rehabilitation_state_of_california_monthly_2016; @us_census_bureau_profile_2010; @department_of_corrections_and_rehabilitation_state_of_california_monthly_2011]


Scholars have previously used the Delano II campaign as a case study in creative social justice organizing strategies that links prison abolition with environmental justice. Rose Braz and Craig Gilmore situate the Delano II case study within the ongoing fight to halt the massive expansion of prisons and incarceration in California since the early 1980s, to document and reveal the radical potential of coalitional strategies like those developed throughout the Delano II campaign. They show how the campaign came to embody the struggle against the biggest threats identified by youth environmental justice activists: the “three Ps” of police, prisons, and pollution.[@braz_joining_2006] Extending this analysis, Ruth Wilson Gilmore uses the campaign to highlight the possibilities that emerge for developing new structures for understanding, and social relations for engaging social change, by looking at the process of coalition building like that around the Delano prison.[@gilmore_forgotten_2008] She describes the way that activists started with a flexible understanding of environmental justice--that highlighted by Braz and Gilmore--to engage people across disparate social identities and political struggles, by identifying commonalities…
____
\[something about when people organize around their shared social-spatial “betweenness” a struggle against dominant--and dominating--flows of capital, people, and resources.\]
____
Gilmore goes on to show how focusing on sites of organized abandonment that are “intensely occupied by the antistate state,” such as Delano, can provide useful insights to the types of conceptual and political linkages that can emerge through and between “marginal people and marginal lands in both urban and rural contexts and raises the urgent question of how to scale up political activity from the level of hyperlocal, atomized organizations to the level of regional coalitions working for a common purpose, partly because their growing understanding of their sameness trumps their previously developed beliefs in their irreconcilable differences.”[@gilmore_forgotten_2008, p. 38]

____
Building on this previous scholarship, I am interested in how the structures of the racial environmental state, and particularly the EIA process, facilitates these important forms of coalitional politics, as well as limitations and contradictions to social justice organizing. The broad scope of the EIA process, and its embedded public feedback mechanisms seem to provide an intrinsic opportunity for coalition building and the development of unexpected political alliances such as those foregrounded in previous scholarship about the Delano campaign. Yet the very structures that enable engagement with the state are circumscribed by the administrative and juridical bounds of public policy. The ways of knowing, shaping, and stretching the concept of racialized and multiply inhabited environments are still bound to legal definitions and precedents. Likewise, the rules of engagement depend upon cartesian definitions of place and belonging, even if affect and political mobilizations might know no such bounds. By reexamining the story of the Delano II prison, I demonstrate both the capacity and limitations of the racial environmental state as an agent of social and environmental change.
____

This chapter details the ways in which the campaign to stop the construction of Delano's second prison gained traction through the use of an environmental justice framework centered on the EIA process. 

____
[Say a bit more about how the campaign's purpose was not to stop the prison from being built as the end, but rather, the campaign was designed to function as a mechanism for organizing people around the idea that prisons are bad for the environment in general. Though the stakes of the prison's construction varied by constituency, the takeaway message was that the prison posed a range of negative environmental impacts whose effects would not be confined to the local environment or local residents, but rather, impacted people across the state.]
____

The campaign to stop the construction of the second prison in Delano was one fight in an ongoing struggle to curtail growth of the prison industrial complex and mass incarceration of people across the US.[@braz_joining_2006] Campaign organizers had three primary goals for the campaign. First was to stop the proposed prison in Delano from coming into existence. Second, was that stopping Delano II would, at least temporarily, end California's massive 20-year prison construction spree that had began in the 1980s. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the campaign was an opportunity for galvanizing broad opposition to the continued expansion of the prison system from constituencies throughout the state.

At the time the Delano II campaign began building steam in 2001, the proposed prison was slated to become the second prison in the small agricultural town still reeling from the construction of its first prison less than a decade earlier. The first prison was supposed to be a boon to the local economy, but never lived up to those promises--while the statewide unemployment rate was nearly halved between 1993 and 2000, from approximately 9.5% to just under 5%, unemployment in Delano remained high and only decreased about a third, from approximately 35% to 23% over the same period.[@us_department_of_labor_bureau_of_labor_statistics_unemployment_2016-1; @us_department_of_labor_bureau_of_labor_statistics_unemployment_2016] But more than just their lack of contribution to the local economy, the Delano prisons stand in for the social, cultural, and political economic shifts that maintain relationships of domination between capital and racialized labor throughout the Valley. The prisons’ imposing presence on the outskirts of Delano serves as a physical reminder of the ways in which the state punatively disciplines people on the margins of capitalist society, the latest in a long legacy of racial projects aimed at dehumanizing and delegitimizing people racialized as illegal, foreign, unassimilable, and exploitable.[cf. @ngai_impossible_2004; @molina_how_2014]
 
Situated within the broader prison abolition struggle, Delano II represented a chance to bring an end to California's massive 20-year prison expansion that resulted in 21 new prisons between 1984 and 1997[@california_department_of_corrections_californias_2007], and saw the number of detainees in state prisons skyrocket from around 25 ,000 in 1980 to 163,000 in 2000--considered the largest such expansion in the history of the world.[@bureau_of_justice_statistics_bureau_????; @gilmore_golden_2007]
____
\[say a bit more about prison abolition\]
____

In addition to the strategic significance of stopping the construction of the Delano prison, the campaign itself, and the tactics used within the campaign, demonstrate the viability of environmental justice principles as a heuristic for organizing diverse struggles within and against the racial environmental state. Environmental justice activism emphasizes the structural interrelatedness of social, economic, and cultural factors in producing and reproducing environmental conditions that render geographically differentiated populations vulnerable to premature death.[@bullard_unequal_1994; @pulido_rethinking_2000; @gilmore_golden_2007] As others have shown, and I discuss later in this chapter, the conceptual flexibility of the environmental justice framework helps to map the impacts of prisons onto the diverse places where prisoners and their families come from, the communities and environments where prisons are erected, and the regions whose economies and resources are burdened by the material effects of prisons.[@braz_joining_2006; @gilmore_forgotten_2008] The campaign hooked into this flexibility to engage a diverse and unlikely range of allies in the public participation and legal mechanisms of the EIA process. Thus, even though the short-term goal of stopping the Delano prison was significant, the campaign's overarching objective was to strengthen the broader movement against the state's use of prisons as a “catch-all solution to social and political problems”[@gilmore_restating_2008, p. 142]

On the one hand, by leveraging the public participation and procedural requirements of the EIA process, campaign organizers compelled the California Department of Corrections (CDC[^8]) to engage the concerns of both private individuals, as well as public entities about the impacts of the prison on a range of stakeholders, the local economy, and the environment. But on the other hand, engaging the state through its own mechanisms of environmental state-making, the campaign was exposed to all of the procedural limitations that EIA carries with it, such as its technocratic language and pedantic reliance on legal doctrine. This double-edged sword of the EIA process, in particular, and engaging the state in general, is a recurrent theme throughout this chapter, and indeed, points back to one of the central contradictions throughout this dissertation, of the potentials and pitfalls inherent to justice sought on the terms of state institutionalization of environmental logics. 

____
By forcing the CDC to further engage the EIA process, organizers were able to
show... 

insert question about the efficacy of this tactic (strategy?) in the broader
scope of abolition. do the limitations of the EIA process ultimately help or
hinder the broader movement building capacity? can the failure of the campaign
to stop the prison be linked to the limitations of the EIA process, or
vice-versa, are the limitations of the legal strategy limitations of the
ambitions of base building?
____
 

## A Brief Racial and Environmental History of the Central Valley

For thousands of years, the Paleuyami and other groups of people associated with the Yokuts and Shoshonean linguistic groups prospered throughout California's southern San Joaquin Valley--the vast stretch of fertile lands nestled between the Tulare Lake basin, the Tule River, Sierra Nevada Mountains, Tehachapi Mountains, and Pacific Coastal Mountains, including the area now incorporated as the City of Delano.[^11][@kroeber_yokuts_1907; @kroeber_shoshonean_1907; @kroeber_handbook_1925; @spier_foothill_1978] In addition to the Paleuyami, some 50 Yokuts tribelets, with a combined population of at least 19,000, inhabited the greater Tulare Lake region, making it one of the most heavily and densely populated regions in the state prior to the arrival of Spanish settlers.[@kroeber_handbook_1925; @preston_vanishing_1981] The first documented expeditions into the San Joaquin Valley by white people were led by Spanish missionaries Pedro Fages and Francisco Garcés in 1772 and 1776, respectively.[@brewer_historic_2001; @garone_fall_2011] Over the next 75 years, a handful of white settlers from Spain, Mexico, and the US established ranches and farms throughout the region. Though relations between the white settlers and indigenous populations may have initially been amicable, the settlers’ racialization of the Yokuts as dirty heathens who “were fickle, unreliable thieves.”[@preston_vanishing_1981, p. 53] The settlers manipulated, coerced, or otherwise enslaved the indigenous populations, inciting resistance and retaliation that further entrenched the settlers’ racist attitudes and justifications for violent attacks on the indigenous populations.[@preston_vanishing_1981] Unsurprisingly, the incursion of these settlers precipitated a sharp decline in Yokuts populations as a result of raids on rancherías, the spread of diseases such as malaria, forced removal, and displacement due to the depletion of resources by settlers’ agricultural activities. By the middle of the 19th century, the Yokuts population was reduced to a quarter of its size prior to contact with white settlers.[@preston_vanishing_1981; @garone_fall_2011]

Following the discovery of gold at Sutter's Mill in 1848, prospectors began scouring the San Joaquin Valley for other mining opportunities. The discovery of gold in the Greenhorn River around 1851 led to the Kern River gold rush and settlement boom across the Valley throughout the 1850s.[@menefee_history_1913; @preston_vanishing_1981; @vredenburgh_brief_1991] Many of the white American settlers drawn to the Valley by the gold rush established agricultural settlements on the fertile soils of the greater Tulare basin in fulfillment of American Manifest Destiny. Settlers’ agricultural activities initially consisted primarily of cattle ranching, but later transitioned to intensive wheat production. The wheat boom drove further settlement of the Valley, and introduced capitalist relationships between people and the land. Though the indigenous populations throughout the region largely depended upon cultivated subsistence agriculture for their survival, the white settlers introduced intensive farming techniques and concentrated livestock grazing to produce marketable commodities and accumulate surplus value.[@preston_vanishing_1981] 

The capitalist restructuring of the San Joaquin Valley ushered by the colonial mentality of American Manifest Destiny transformed the Valley’s social and environmental landscape. The increase in white settlement of the Valley and conversion of the land to agricultural uses further entrenched the remaining indigenous populations. Some of the Yokuts and other indigenous populations were enlisted as low-wage farm labor, however many more were pushed eastward, out of the Valley and into the foothills of the Sierra Nevada Mountains. 

At the time of the gold rush, Tulare Lake, situated along the western central edge of the San Joaquin Valley, was the largest areal body of fresh water in the western part of the continent. In the latter part of the nineteenth-century, diversions of the tributary rivers to Tulare Lake for agricultural irrigation led to the disappearance of all of the lake's surface water except in times of floods.[@alexander_report_1874; @preston_vanishing_1981; @vredenburgh_brief_1991]



Beginning in the 1850s, environmental change resulting from the growing
agricultural industry in the San Joaquin Valley, coupled with the
colonial mentality of American Manifest Destiny of white ranchers and prospectors,
led to significant tensions with the remaining Yokuts populations and
former "Mission" Indians who fled the coast in seek of refuge in the
Valley.[@gorenfeld_tule_1999] Expanding agricultural land uses, particularly livestock
grazing, reduced the availability of environmental resources for the
indigenous peoples. As a result, skirmishes and livestock rustling
increased, and eventually led to the "Indian War" of 1856, which further
drove the Yokuts out of the Valley[^22]. Further sealing the fate of the
Valley under settler domination, the US Department of the Interior
conducted a Public Land Survey between 1851 and 1855, which
ideologically transformed the lands into parceled commodities, ripe for
the extraction of value and further domination through the technologies
of capitalism[^23].

The Public Land Survey was part of a coordinated effort to secure the
Valley for capitalist expansion. In addition to classifying and
quantifying the commercial potential of real estate parcels for
agricultural uses, the surveys were conducted to identify potential rail
routes through the Valley and across the Sierra Nevada Mountains[^24].
The establishment of rail lines throughout the Valley would allow for
cheaper transportation of commercial agricultural goods, while also
allowing for quicker transport of troops to ensure military dominance of
the settlers against the remaining indigenous populations still
scattered throughout the Valley and foothills.

With construction of the transcontinental railroad completed in May
1869, the Central Pacific Railroad Company initiated construction later
that year of a rail line down the San Joaquin Valley to eventually
connect Sacramento and San Francisco to Los Angeles[^25]. Around the
same time, Central Pacific started a cemetery along the planned route,
just south of the border between Tulare and Kern Counties, where many of
the rail workers would be buried, including an unmarked mass grave of
numerous Chinese laborers killed in a cholera epidemic[^26]. Due to
financial troubles, the Southern Pacific Railroad Company, which had
been purchased by the “Big Four” controlling shareholders of Central
Pacific in 1868, halted construction of the railroad tracks and set up a
railhead in the vicinity of the cemetery, establishing the town of
Delano in 1873, named in honor of Columbus Delano, Secretary of the
Interior under President Grant. This rail connection spurred a new wave
of growth as investors, homesteaders, and laborers flocked to Delano to
take advantage of the commercial agriculture possibilities opened by the
improved connectivity and sense of “security” the railroad line provided
for white settlers[^27].

In addition to the railroad and land surveys, two other contributing
factors in the settlement of the Valley were the establishment of
irrigational water diversions and the invention of barbed wire fencing.
Starting in 1854 near Visalia, large-scale irrigation projects began
diverting water from the tributaries to Tulare Lake in order to increase
arable lands, to protect against drought and dry seasons, and by the
1860s, to increase commercial crop yields, especially on smaller farms
lacking the economic buffers afforded by scale. Prior to the No Fence
Law of 1874 and invention of barbed wire fencing that same year,
ranchers largely relied on open range grazing for their stocks of cattle
and sheep, both of which were in heavy demand for food and wool,
respectively. Prior to that year, the prohibitive cost of enclosing
farms with fencing effectively discouraged large-scale farming due to
the risk of livestock damaging crops; but the new law and inexpensive
barbed wire tipped the scales toward agriculture since they allowed
farmers to sue ranchers for damages or confiscate stray livestock, while
reducing the cost to enclose farmland. As a result, wheat farming boomed
with the availability of cheap rail transport and eager markets
overseas. However, the wheat boom gradually gave way to the expansion of
fruit orchards due to the widespread cultivation of wheat elsewhere in
the country combined with the high profitability of fruit production.
Whereas wheat was easily planted and harvested on small farms, the
transition to labor-intensive fruit cultivation established new demands
for labor, which would ultimately transform the Valley once more. By the
early twentieth-century, the Valley was (some sort of statistic about
production and economy). In the fields around the City of Delano,
dominant crops included table grapes, cotton, sheep, and cattle,
supplemented by tree fruits, nuts, and row crops[^28].

**Water and Workers**

\[farm consolidation, sheridan downey, use of acreage
limits/groundwater/aqueduct policy as a mechanisms for farm
consolidation and centralization of power\]

As the commercial agricultural industry grew in Delano and throughout
the San Joaquin Valley, so too did the tensions and contradictions of
growth premised around racial capitalism. US Census Bureau records
indicate that the City of Delano had a small, mostly white population of
about 800 in 1920[^29]. When the Dust Bowl drought and dust storms
plagued the Great Plains in the early 1930s, thousands of “Okies” and
“Arkies” relocated to the San Joaquin Valley, both as fixed settlers and
itinerant farm pickers alongside the Mexican, Japanese, and Filipino
populations that accounted for upwards of 75% of the agricultural labor
force[^30]. The influx of white labor via the Dust Bowl, coupled with
the effects of the Great Depression, created xenophobic tensions in the
agricultural labor market, and in the early 1930s, state and local
government agents, as well as the Federal Bureau of Immigration[^31]
coercively pressured or forcefully deported, hundreds of thousands of
Mexican and Filipino workers, many of whom were US citizens, to
Mexico[^32](better citation needed). Despite the deportations, Delano's
population continued to grow, and by 1940, the official population
nearly doubled from that of 1930, most likely with a significant
undercount of migrant labor.

When the US ramped up its military industrial machinery during World War
II, most of the white farmworkers were drawn away from the fields and
into the battlefields or manufacturing sectors. The resulting labor
shortages led Franklin Delano Roosevelt to initiate the Mexican Farm
Labor Program, or “bracero” guest worker program in 1942, to ensure the
continued surplus of low-wage agricultural labor, especially in the West
Coast including places like Delano. The poorly regulated program and
lack of enforcement mechanisms led to inhumane living conditions,
withheld pay, and mistreatment among farm workers; a large influx of
non-contract Mexican farm workers; and virtual collapse of organized
labor unions within agriculture (citations). Yet the bracero program
also gave rise to renewed labor militancy, with bracero strikes
throughout the Northwest, and the efforts of organized labor unions
contributing to the end of the bracero program in 1964 (citations).

One of the unions strengthened by militant organizing efforts amongst
farm workers was the Agricultural Workers Organizing Committee (AWOC).
Three years after César Chávez began serious efforts at organizing
farmworkers throughout California's Central Valley, and on the heels of
a successful National Farm Workers Association (NFWA) grape pickers
strike at Martin Ranch, the Delano AWOC, comprised primarily of Filipino
grape pickers, and led by Philip Vera Cruz and Larry Itliong (and
Benjamin Gines and Pete Velasco; need citations), organized a strike
against table grape growers in 1965. They immediately reached out to
Chávez for NFWA support, knowing that the campaign's success depended on
the unified front of Filipino, Mexican, and Chicano laborers, as well as
other organizations such as the International Longshore and Warehouse
Union. A week after AWOC walked off the fields, NFWA voted in Delano to
join the strike, and a year into the campaign, AWOC and NFWA merged,
forming the United Farm Workers of America (UFW). The campaign endured
for five years, but the UFW emerged victorious, securing contracts with
both of the growers in the campaign's crosshairs, and marking the first
major victory for union organizing amongst farm workers, and setting the
tone for the use of a combined strategy of a nonviolent field strike,
labor boycott, consumer boycott, marches, and hunger strikes (need some
citations).

\[Over the course of the strike, labor organizers faced violence and FBI
surveillance and infiltration through COINTELPRO. \]

The victory in the table grape strike at Delano marks the birth of the
UFW and a significant turning point in farm labor unionization, both of
which, in turn, are important dimensions of the solidification of
Chicano and Latino political power, particularly within California.
\[Include something about this significance over the next quarter
century\].

Transformation of the agricultural economy over the next 30
years…drought, recession, and failed development…

Less than a quarter century after the table grape strike victory, plans
were underway to build the first state prison in Delano, the North Kern
State Prison.

Racial environmental state arguments about settler state and
transformation of the agricultural economy.

Did environmental policy, in any form, play a role in enabling the
settler state? Certainly, in terms of land policy that allowed for
prospecting and homesteading. But also things like the change in law
about grazing livestock (Preston 1981), which dramatically shaped the
social and economic capacities for settlers. By transferring land
entitlement away from free-roam ranchers toward farmers, the state
enabled the growth of commercial farming, redoubled the commitment of
land to enclosure and private ownership, and further transformed the
relationship between settlers and indigenous peoples. When farming took
hold of the Valley, the demand for low-wage labor brought an influx of
migrants.

\[Something about irrigation and water policy?\]

Shortly after the first prison in Delano, North Kern State Prison (NKSP)
began accepting inmates in 1993, the California Department of
Corrections (CDC) began planning for a second state prison within the
City of Delano, which it designated the California State Prison-Kern
County at Delano II (Delano II). Since the early 1980s, the State of
California had been engaged in a prolonged expansion of its prison
system, and beds were being filled with new inmates just as fast as they
were being constructed. As Ruth Wilson Gilmore explains, the state had
found in prisons a “catch all solution to its political and economic
problems,” and Delano II was to be the latest addition to California's
prison construction boom.[^33]

CDC progressed with the planning for Delano II, initiating the
environmental review process in the first half of 1994 by completing an
environmental impact report (EIR), the state-level equivalent of the
EIS, as required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the
State of California's “mini-NEPA” statute. Whereas federally funded
projects in the U.S. are subject to NEPA and its EIA process, the State
of California requires state funded projects to adhere to the state's
equivalent of NEPA, the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
Like NEPA, CEQA mandates an EIA process, which includes the
Environmental Impact Report (EIR) and a published Notice of
Determination (NOD), or the state equivalents to the EIS and ROD under
NEPA. While there are significant differences between NEPA and CEQA, for
the purpose at hand they dissolve beneath their structural imperatives
to get state administrators thinking about environmental factors in
their decision making, and to open that process up to public scrutiny.

The Delano II EIR produced by CDC in 1994 called for a 400-acre, 4,180
inmate facility with a Level IV maximum security designation[^34].
Through the process of feedback and revision, however, the planned
facility was scaled back. By the time CDC certified the EIR and issued
its NOD in 1995, the proposed prison called for a site on 320-acres,
housing only 2,200 inmates.[^35] CDC selected Delano as the site for a
new California state prison based on \[couldn't find anything in EIR…\].
The specific plot of land CDC selected for the prison is located
approximately four miles west of California Highway 99, approximately
2.5 miles west of Delano's urbanized area, and about half a mile south
of the existing North Kern State Prison, and just west of the 500-bed
Delano Community Correctional Facility. The site is formerly
agricultural farmland, and is surrounded on three sides by productive
farmland.

In California, the majority of prisons are located in rural areas,
especially throughout the central region of the state in the San Joaquin
Valley. The vast majority of prisoners, however, come from urban
centers, particularly the Los Angeles Metropolitan Area (CDCR 2011).
\[Could potentially add lots here… this is just a placeholder for now\]

The siting of prisons in poorer rural communities, particularly where
there is a large population for whom English is not the primary language
spoken at home.

Cerrell Report (1984): “suggests that companies target small, rural
communities whose residents are low income, older people, or people with
a high school education or less; communities with a high proportion of
Catholic residents; and communities whose residents are engaged in
resource extractive industries such as agriculture, mining and
forestry.”

Why rural areas? In addition to the Cerrell Report, evidence points to
the success of a group of grassroots activists who called themselves the
Madres del Este de Los Angeles, or Mothers of East L.A., as a major
factor in the switch from urban to rural prison siting. \[Brief
descriptive info on the East LA Prison campaign\] \[link MELA to EJ
framework, pointing back to Joining Forces\]

Ruthie's Desakota article, linking people and places, betweenness.

**Funding the Prison**

While the CDC successfully completed its statutory requirements to begin
construction of Delano II in 1995, the plans had to be placed on hold
when the state legislature failed to provide funding for the prison.
Throughout the first half of the 1990s, California was struck harder by
economic recession and recovered much more slowly than the rest of the
US.[^36]* Furthermore, reductions in military spending following the end
of the Cold War had a particularly strong effect on the California
economy due to base closures and reduced contracts to the aerospace
industry, one of Southern California's largest industries.[^37]* As a
result, the state shifted its budget priorities, making significant
reductions to spending related to health and welfare, and modest
increases in corrections and education spending. However, the roughly 8%
increases in corrections spending in both the 1994-1995 and 1995-1996
state budgets merely covered the costs associated with increasing prison
populations, and the projected growth resulting from the “Three Strikes”
law enacted in 1994.[^38] Despite projections of continued growth in
prison populations and overcrowding in existing prisons, the 1995-1996
budget did not allot any funds for the construction of new prisons,
including Delano II, so the project was put on indefinite hold pending
budgetary approval.

Even though prison construction ground to a halt in the mid 1990s, the
policing and sentencing practices that kept prison beds filled, did not.
Despite the long-term trend of decreasing crime rates between the
mid-1980s and 2000, the continued growth in California's prison
populations throughout the 1990s--fueled in part by enactment of the
notorious “Three Strikes and You're Out” law in 1994--led to
unsustainable overcrowding. In 1999, the newly elected Democratic
Governor Gray Davis indicated his willingness to see the prison system
resume its expansion by proposing a budget that allocated \$335 million
for construction of the Delano II prison and the planning of a second
additional prison.[^39] In May 1999, a month before the final budget
would be approved by the legislature, Governor Davis pushed through
urgency legislation[^40] allocating over \$311 million toward Delano II
implementation, including \$4 million for the cost of mitigating the
prison's impacts on the municipal government.[^41]

Funding for the prison came in the form of lease-purchase financing and
lease-revenue bonds.[^42] This financing plan meant that Delano II, like
other prisons built in California since 1985, would be constructed using
funds derived from the issuance of specially crafted bonds that don't
require voter approval. Ruth Wilson Gilmore argues that lease-revenue
bonds are one of the pieces to the partial “fix” to crises of
accumulation that enabled the California prison boom over the last two
decades of the twentieth century.[^43] The way that lease-revenue bonds
work is first the State Public Works Board issues bonds to pay for
construction costs of a new prison (or university expansion). The Public
Works Board then leases the prison to the CDC, who, in turn, uses its
tax-funded operating budget to cover the lease payments back to the
Public Works Board. The Public Works Board uses the lease payments cover
the bond repayments to the private investors holding the bonds. In
essence, the state manages to lease the prison to itself to shift the
prison financing from voter-approved municipal bonds to the riskier,
higher-interest lease-revenue bonds approved only by the legislature and
governor. Gilmore explains that this process also establishes prisons as
an infrastructural securities investment mechanism with higher returns
for private firms than standard municipal bonds with little added
investment risk, and a whole lot less potential for political fallout
from the increased tax burden of voter-approved municipal bonds.[^44]
Unsurprisingly, this is the same financial arrangement that allowed the
state to bankroll capital construction outlays in its public
universities in order to funnel federally financed student debt into
bond repayments to private investment firms. These financial mechanisms
help illustrate the complex ways in which publicly funded prisons and
universities actually produce federally backed securitized profits
through the racialized production of misery in incarcerated and indebted
populations.

With budgetary green light in the form of legislature-approved
lease-revenue bonds, CDC resumed planning for Delano II in 1999. Due to
the continued growth in prison populations over the intervening years,
CDC increased the planned prison capacity by 235% from the initially
approved capacity of 2,000 inmates,up to 5,160 inmates, and from a
320-acre site up to a 480-acre site.[^45] This design change triggered
the need to amend the previously approved 1995 EIR with additional
analyses considering the environmental impacts of the newly proposed
design revisions. In February 2000, CDC published the Draft Supplemental
EIR (SEIR) for a 45-day period for public review and comment and held a
subsequent public hearing to receive oral comments, in accordance with
CEQA guidelines[^46]. On May 22, 2000, CDC published a Final SEIR
containing a record of the comments received and CDC responses to those
comments, followed by the publication of the Notice of Determination
(NOD) approving the Final SEIR on June 7, 2000[^47], which is the
California equivalent to the NEPA Record of Decision granting final
approval of the environmental review process. Typically, this is the
point at which the lead agency may proceed with project implementation.
However, in the case of Delano II, this was the point at which organized
opposition to the prison led to a five-year delay in prison
implementation with a lawsuit built around the requirements of
California's EIA process.

*Taking the Prison to Court*

When Governor Davis pushed to pass the urgency legislation to fund the
Delano II prison construction, organizers from across the state rallied
opposition to the funding bill at the state capitol. Despite their
efforts, the bill was passed by the legislature. However, the energies
directed at opposing the bill were not for naught, as the organizers
maintained their momentum by redirecting their efforts toward other
avenues of action, including the legal foothold afforded them by the
environmental review process.

In July, 2000, one month after the CDC filed the Notice of Determination
(NOD) approving the Final SEIR, a coalition of prison abolitionists and
environmental justice activists filed a lawsuit against CDC to prevent
construction from commencing because of alleged inadequacies in the
SEIR. The coalition was represented by environmental lawyer Babak
Naficy, Esq., who filed the lawsuit against CDC with the Kern County
Superior Court of California on behalf of the three named plaintiffs,
Critical Resistance (CR), the National Lawyers Guild Prison Law Project
(NLGPLP), and Friends of the Kangaroo Rat. The lawsuit petitioned for a
Writ of Administrative Mandate and injunctive relief, or in other words,
requested the court to review and overturn the CDC decision to approve
the Delano II SEIR and halt further action toward prison construction.
CDC immediately challenged the legal grounds for CR and NLGPLP to
participate in the lawsuit. CDC asserted that both parties lacked
standing, or the legal basis for claiming harms caused by the proposed
prison. CDC's lawyers claimed that the intent for both CR and NLGPLPto
bring suit was predicated not on environmental harms that might result
from shortcomings in the SEIR, but rather, on a non-environmental
political agenda aimed at stopping prison expansion.

 Several months after the campaign organizers filed their lawsuit
against CDC, they organized a conference in Fresno, about 90 miles north
of Delano, to bring together prison abolitionists and environmental
justice activists from across California. This conference, titled
“Joining Forces: Environmental Justice and the Fight Against Prison
Expansion,” aimed to build political alliances that took advantage of
the conceptual linkages between existing anti-racist social justice
struggles and environmental justice networks throughout California. One
of the outcomes from the conference was a network of supporters backing
the lawsuit against CDC, and several organizations subsequently filed
amici curiae briefs on behalf of the organizers.

Nearly a full year elapsed before the Superior Court finally handed down
its decision in the lawsuit. The court ruled that ultimately, the SEIR
submitted by the CDC was insufficient to account for the combined
cumulative impacts of the proposed prison in light of the existing
prison on the adjacent lot. The court ordered CDC to address these
deficiencies by completing further environmental assessments, including
the public review process, effectively halting construction plans for
the time being.[^48] This marked a tremendous victory for the coalition
of abolitionists, environmental justice activists, local residents, and
even state officials drawn in to the conflict.

The CDC submitted a Revised Cumulative Impact Assessment, and after
another two years of litigation, eventually had the stay on construction
lifted by the Court of Appeals. Down but not out, the campaign
organizers switched their efforts from the legal strategy based around
the prison's environmental impact to a legislative strategy aimed at
stopping the prison from being funded. The legal campaign waged through
environmental policy infrastructure generated a broad base of supporters
in the campaign to stop the prison from being funded. The strategy of
linking the prison construction to environmental justice issues, social
justice issues for working-class communities of color, as well as
environmental land, ecology, and resource issues gave the campaign wide
ranging support that extended beyond hardcore environmentalists and
prison abolitionists. This means that the organizers were successful in
conveying the common sense message that prison construction based on
racist profit models was not a good way to build safer communities.

On June 7, 2001, after almost a year of back-and-forth between the
lawyers and courts, the Superior Court ruled in favor of CDC on the
issue of standing, forcing CR and NLG to withdraw from the lawsuit;
Friends of the Kangaroo Rat stayed on the lawsuit to its conclusion.
Before the courts even had a chance to weigh the merits of the lawsuit,
two-thirds of the team fighting the construction of Delano II were
pushed out of the courts, despite the renewed effort from campaign
supporters to substantiate the standing claims of CR and NLG. The
court's decision reveals two important considerations for the case
study--the determination of standing in relation to the EIS process, and
the broader campaign strategy used by the campaign organizers.

The decision handed down by the Superior Court in June 2001, included
two important rulings. The first ruling, which is discussed in greater
detail below, was that CR and NLG lacked standing as plaintiffs in the
trial. The second ruling dismissed two of the arguments challenging the
deficiency of the SEIR, but upheld the third. By ruling in favor of the
plaintiffs on the third point, which related to cumulative impacts, the
court effectively stopped CDC from continuing with the construction of
Delano II until they addressed the impact studies required by the court.
The court found that the cumulative impact analysis in the SEIR “did not
adequately address the effect of past projects and existing projects,
and…failed to provide a summary of the expected environmental effects of
the pending and proposed projects” (4 Cal. Rptr. 3d 562). This marked a
tremendous victory for the plaintiffs because it meant that CDC would
have to return to the EIA process to further examine the environmental
impacts of the proposed prison, and submit their updated findings for
another round of public review.

Despite ruling in favor of requiring CDC to prepare a cumulative impact
analysis, the Court ruled against the plaintiffs on a number of other
points based on merit. These additional arguments included (1) failure
to fully and adequately describe the proposed prison development
project; (2) failure to consider a reasonable range of alternatives to
the proposed prison; (3) failure to propose adequate measures to
mitigate the significant foreseeable impacts on wastewater treatment,
the San Joaquin Kit Fox, the Tipton Kangaroo Rat, and on local schools.
By granting the cumulative impact argument but rejecting these
additional arguments, the Court reduced the scope of future legal
arguments that could be used to hold CDC responsible when it completed
its cumulative impact analysis.

The legal concept of standing is complex, particularly with regard to
environmental law, and because of its gatekeeping function within the
judicial system, shouldn't be taken lightly. In environmental law,
standing refers to the plaintiff's ability to establish that they suffer
injury from a project or action, and that it will continue unless the
court takes action. They also need to establish a chain of causation
that links the project or action to some portion of the environment used
by the plaintiff or some member of a plaintiff's party. The form of
injury claimed does not need to be physical or economical; aesthetic or
recreational impairments are also considered valid based on past US
Supreme Court decisions.[^49] In the case of Delano II, the court ruled
that CR and NLG both lacked standing, meaning they were not allowed to
participate in the lawsuit. The lawsuit rested on the plaintiffs' claim
that there were three areas of environmental impacts not considered
under the SEIR that would cause harm to the plaintiffs. The Court ruled
that neither Critical Resistance nor the NLG sufficiently substantiated
that any of these three areas of impacts would directly inflict injuries
upon members of either organization since they did not bring forth
evidence that they lived, worked, or played within the local
environments that would be affected if the prison were to be
constructed.

This is an important point because it's well within reason to assert
that the construction of a new prison will directly impact the living
environments of potentially incarcerated individuals and their families,
and as we know from history, the addition of beds to the prison system
means bodies will be found to occupy them--and those will
disproportionately be black or brown. But in the eyes of the courts,
such factors don't count toward standing. Only impacts directly linked
to the changes in the physical environment resulting from the state's
action in constructing a prison count toward standing; impacts
conjecturally related to potentially incarcerated persons do not
count.[^50]

Ironically, the bodies employed within a prison as guards and staff
would count toward standing, but those bodies unemployed, incapacitated,
and rendered surplus somehow don't count in this case.[^51]

CDC complied with the court order and produced a Revised Cumulative
Impact Analysis (RCIA). This document provided a brief history of the
region and detailed analysis of the projects developed in the 15-year
period leading up to Delano II. Essentially an addendum to the SEIR, it
required a 45-day period for public review and comment, initiated August
15, 2001, prior to finalization and approval by the CDC director. Six
months after the Superior Court's ruling, the revised SEIR including the
RCIA received approval and CDC filed a NOD on December 13, 2001.

On December 13, 2001, the CDC attorney filed a Return to the Writ and
Motion for Discharge of the Writ. These filings notify the Superior
Court that the CDC completed and approved the RCIA, including the
necessary public hearings, and ask the Court to dismiss the case and
withdraw the order preventing them from proceeding with construction.
The Court agreed to hear the case, and several months later, on April 4,
2002, the Court ruled that the CDC's revised analysis was sufficient,
and dismissed the case on April 18, 2002. Then on July 7, 2002, Friends
filed an appeal with the California Court of Appeals, Fifth District,
charging that the CDC had still not fulfilled its CEQA obligations in
the RCIA. The appeals process lasted over a year, but on August 18,
2003, the Court ruled in favor of CDC, lifting the final legal barrier
to construction of the Delano II prison.

\[Discussion of the depublication of the court decision\]

The case brought forth against the CDC in the Court of Appeals by the
coalition opposed to the prison construction contained three main points
arguing that the RCIA was insufficient and therefore necessitated
further study and justification by the CDC before the prison could be
constructed. The first point regarded the proposal for the prison to
obtain its water supply by pumping groundwater and treating its
wastewater on-site for distribution to neighboring farms for
agricultural irrigation, free of charge. This proposal, Friends argued,
would negatively impact the local water supplier, the South San Joaquin
Municipal Utility District (SSJMUD), by reducing its income potential,
and by extension, impact its customer base due to increased supply rates
(the “water issue”) (Friends v. CDC \[depublished\]). The Court waived
this argument on the grounds that the issue had not been raised in the
administrative record, and therefore, Friends did not have legal grounds
to raise the issue in court (Friends pg. 22). The second point raised in
the appeal argued the inadequacy of the RCIA in assessing the cumulative
impact of probable future traffic patterns (the “traffic issue”).
Friends argued that the RCIA failed to fully consider the Delano General
Plan and Kern County Council of Governments regional transportation
model in determining cumulative traffic impacts of the proposed prison;
the Court rejected this argument on merits (Friends v. CDC \[depublished
pg. 32\]. The final issue raised in the appeal was that the RCIA did not
adequately consider possible mitigation measures to the conversion of
farmland to non-agricultural uses (the “farmland issue”). Whereas the
CDC determined in the RCIA that there was no feasible mitigation for the
conversion of farmland to nonagricultural uses, Friends argued that CDC
should have evaluated the possibility of establishing an easement on
neighboring farmlands to prevent future developments from further
reducing agricultural land uses in the area. The Court again rejected
this argument on merits (Friends pg. 37; original pg. 567)

The first argument, the “water issue,” concerned the CDC proposal to
obtain its water supply from groundwater pumping on the site of the new
prison. The existing farmland on the proposed site used surface water
supplied by SSJMUD, supplemented by a small amount of groundwater when
needed (Friends \[depublished pg. 9\]). In the RCIA, the CDC proposed
supplanting the SSJMUD supplied surface water previously used on the
site with groundwater, and redistributing the treated wastewater for
irrigation of neighboring farmlands (Friends \[depublished pg. 9-10\]).
The RCIA concluded that groundwater pumping would result in significant
environmental changes to both the local groundwater and surface water
supplies. Friends argued that this conclusion was not supported by
sufficient evidence. Rather than address the The Court of Appeals ruled
that CDC was shielded from the water issue because Friends “failed to
exhausted its administrative remedies with regard to the issue it
\[raised\] concerning the use of water at the site” (Friends
\[depublished pg. 9\]). In order for an issue to be raised as the basis
for legal action in a CEQA case, the party bringing the lawsuit needs to
provide evidence that the issue was brought to the attention of the lead
agency conducting the environmental review process, through official
channels during the public feedback periods.

The Court of Appeals ruled that neither of the two letters brought forth
as evidence of the administrative record sufficiently raised a valid
reason to require CDC to further investigate the water impacts of the
proposed prison prior to the certification of the RCIA. The first
letter, the Court ruled, did not qualify as part of the administrative
record since it was sent prior to publication of the RCIA, to someone
other than the designated contact for the public comment period of the
CEQA review. The second letter was included in the administrative
record, however the CDC responded, and the Court concurred, that the
letter based its arguments on economic impacts outside the scope of
CEQA. As in NEPA, socioeconomic considerations are not *per se* covered
by CEQA impact analysis requirements,[^52] however, socioeconomic
effects directly caused by, or which result in changes to the physical
environment can be considered.[^53] In the case of the second letter
discussing the water issue, the Court determined that the basis for
dissent with the RCIA lay only in economic impacts to SSJMUD due to
changes in water usage, and not due to changes in either the physical
surface water or groundwater conditions, thereby disqualifying the
letter as part of the administrative record justifying legal action
under CEQA.[^54] This nuance of causality, dependent upon physical
changes to the environment, is one of the important ways in which
judicial narrowing decreases the scope and applicability of NEPA and
similar EIA statutes.

The third argument Friends made in the Court of Appeals concerned the
conversion of farmland to nonagricultural uses to accommodate the
proposed prison and its associated infrastructure. The RCIA concluded
that a total of 2,300 acres of agricultural land would be converted to
nonagricultural uses, and that no mitigation measures were available to
reduce this impact to the environment. Therefore, it concluded that the
conversion of farmland was a significant and unavoidable environmental
impact (Friends \[original pg. 564\]). Friends argued that this
conclusion was insufficient because it failed to consider, among other
things, the possibility of mitigating the environmental impact through
the establishment of agricultural easements on farmland in the vicinity
of the proposed prison (Friends \[original pg 565\]; See also Williamson
Act and California Farmland Conservancy Program Act). In theory,
establishing an agricultural easement might function as a mitigation
measure for developing over agricultural lands by ensuring that some
portion of existing agricultural lands are shielded in perpetuity from
future developments. The Court rejected this argument on merits:

> The CDC correctly observed that once the prison is built and the 480
  acres of farmland at that site have been converted to what the RCIA
  calls “an institutional use” (i.e., a prison), the 480 acres of farmland
  will be gone…The only option for “mitigating or avoiding the project's
  contribution to” loss of farmland would be to not build the prison.
  (Guidelines, § 15130, subd. (b)(3).) This is in essence the “‘No
  project' alternative” which was required to be discussed in the SEIR
  (see Guidelines, §15126.6, subd. (e))…

> Appellant's suggestion that an agricultural easement be created assumes,
  incorrectly in our view, that the creation of an agricultural easement
  would constitute “mitigation.” We disagree…The easement would presumably
  not be on the site of one of the “probable future projects” identified
  in the RCIA. (Guidelines § 15130, subd. (b)(1)(A).) It would thus not
  reduce or mitigate the loss of farmland caused by this project or by the
  “probable future projects” (Guidelines, § 15130, subd. (b)(1)(A), §
  15065, subd. (c).) The suggested agricultural easement would presumably
  not create any new farmland where no farmland presently exists (at least
  appellant does not so claim). Thus an agricultural easement would not
  compensate for a loss of farmland “by replacing or providing substitute
  resources or environments” (Guidelines § 15370, subd. (e)), and would
  not fall within subdivision (e) of Guidelines § 15370. At best, such an
  easement might prevent the future conversion of some as yet unidentified
  parcel of farmland to a nonagricultural use. Although appellant might
  deem this to be a desirable result, appellant's desire for such a result
  does turn appellant's proposed action into mitigation of the cumulative
  impact (on farmland) of this project and of the past, present, and
  probable future projects properly considered in the RCIA. (Friends pg.
  566-567)

The basis for the Court's ruling against Friends boils down to the
rejection of the claim that an agricultural easement might mitigate the
conversion of farmland into non-agricultural use. The ramifications of
this ruling extend beyond this case study, with continuing relevance in
ongoing debates as to whether or not the loss of agricultural lands to
development can be reasonably mitigated, and therefore, what
responsibility government agencies have to evaluate and mitigate the
effects of development projects on agricultural and other protected
lands.[^55] Importantly, after the Court of Appeals issued its decision
rejecting Friends' appeal, Friends and its allies throughout the state
successfully petitioned the Court to depublish the final ruling, meaning
that the case cannot be cited as legal precedent by either courts or
parties in future cases.[^56]

Depublication of the *Friends *ruling has had an important and lasting
impact on case law regarding mitigating the loss of agricultural lands
within and beyond California, because even though it cannot be cited as
legal precedent, it still informs both administrative and legal decision
making[^57]. Additionally, courts have differed in their findings
regarding the validity of easements or fees in-lieu as mitigation
measures required to be considered under CEQA. Indeed, in 2004, the
California Court of Appeals for the third district issued a conflicting
ruling in *South County Citizens for Responsible Growth v. City of Elk
Grove* (2004) (Cal.App.3 Dist.) that agricultural easements or
conservation fees could mitigate the loss of agricultural lands to
future development pressures, and therefore, the lead agency had an
obligation under CEQA to address the issue in its impact assessments.
The *South County Citizens* decision was not published, so like the
*Friends* decision, it could not be cited as legal precedent. Then, a
decade after the *Friends* case was decided, the California Court of
Appeals for the First District issued a decision in the case of
*Masonite Corp. v. County of Mendocino* (218 Cal. App. 4th 230, 238, 241
(1st Dist. 2013)), in which the Court ruled, like in the South County
Citizens decision, that a lead agency has a CEQA obligation to consider
the use of easements or fees as appropriate mitigation measures for the
conversion of agricultural lands. Unlike the previous two cases, this
case was published, so at least in the First District, a precedent was
finally established to require consideration of agricultural mitigation
within the EIA process.[^58]

My purpose in exploring the nuances of this (depublished) court decision
is not to nitpick or criticize the Court's judicial discretion, but
rather, to highlight both the precarity and potential flexibility of EIA
applicability. The ease with which the Court dismissed the entire water
issue based on the technicalities of the record demonstrating the
exhaustion of administrative remedies prior to legal action points to
the limitations of legal relief in the EIA process, but also the
importance (and difficulty) of utilizing a strategy that fully engages
the entire EIA process with legal exactitude. While the Court of Appeals
ruling could not be predicted during the public feedback periods of the
Delano EIA process, engaging a broad coalition of EIA respondents across
a diverse range of issues did provide a crucial foothold for litigation.

**Resistance to the Prison**

Several months after filing the lawsuit against the CDC, members of the
organization Critical Resistance, one of the plaintiffs in the lawsuit,
helped to organize a day-long conference in Fresno, about 90 miles north
of Delano, to bring together prison abolitionists and environmental
justice activists from across California. Held in February 2001, this
conference, titled “Joining Forces: Environmental Justice and the Fight
Against Prison Expansion,” aimed to build political alliances and
develop organizing strategies that took advantage of the conceptual
linkages between existing anti-racist social justice struggles and
environmental justice networks throughout California (Braz and Gilmore
2006).[^59] Braz and Gilmore (2006) describe the conference as “the
first statewide gathering designed to explore the place of prisons in
the environmental justice movement and the ways that antiprison
activists can learn from environmental justice examples.” In addition to
Critical Resistance, sponsoring organizations included the California
Prison Moratorium Project, the Southwest Network for Environmental and
Economic Justice, the Center on Race, Poverty and Environment, Fresno
State University MEChA, and the West County Toxics Coalition.

\[Possibly some additional details from the conference, summarizing from
Braz and Gilmore (2006) and Gilmore (2008)\]

One of the outcomes from the conference was a network of supporters
backing the lawsuit against CDC, and several organizations subsequently
filed amici curiae briefs on behalf of the organizers.

The two main ways that people and organizations have used NEPA and the
EIA process to intervene in proposed projects and programs are through
its public feedback mechanisms and through the use of judicial review.
The EIA process is often represented using a flow chart to highlight the
various steps, decisions, stakeholders, and timelines involved in
fulfilling NEPA (or equivalent state-level legislation) requirements
(see figure X). Each decision node within the flowchart presents an
opportunity for both public feedback and judicial review. The legal
basis for this intervention lies in the U.S. Administrative Procedures
Act of 1946 (APA), which provides judicially reviewable guidelines for
public transparency throughout the decision making process. This means
that the lead agency is responsible for researching, documenting, and
publicly reporting the decision making process. Individual citizens and
organizations can challenge adherence to NEPA requirements through the
APA if they believe the lead agency failed in its responsibilities, or
made decisions that appear “arbitrary or capricious” (citation).

An important lessons of the Friends case is that a social justice
strategy utilizing NEPA or its equivalents needs to engage the entire
EIA process according to the guidelines and limitations established by
the state through administrative policies, quasi-formal guidance
documents, and legal precedent. While the EIA process institutionalizes
modes of participatory and legal dissent to state actions, it also
requires negotiating the complex bureaucracy and attending to minute
legal details that the state carries in tow.

The longview perspective of the Delano II campaign reveals that it was
highly successful, even if the Kern Valley State Prison eventually came
to fruition. The campaign delayed the doors from opening by five years.
The strategies employed by CDC? The movement and coalitions that
developed. The relationships developed between prison abolition
organizers and state and regional government officials?

As part of the public disclosure process, and to minimize the likelihood
of a lawsuit, the lead agency is required to elicit public feedback at
each of the steps in the aforementioned EIA process flow chart. Over the
course of the entire EIA process, the lead agency will arrange a series
of public meetings--informational, scoping, and feedback--where
information, concerns, and dissent about the proposed action. These
meetings are paired with the opportunity to submit written comments,
with all verbal and written comments becoming part of the permanent,
published EIA record. Comments and feedback can range from simple
letters of support, to requests for consideration of additional factors
or data, to lengthy point-by-point critiques of the lead agency's work.
The lead agency is legally obligated (citation or footnote explanation)
to respond to every written comment or oral testimony received during
public feedback periods. Responding to the comments does not mean an
obligation to remediate or resolve the issue raised, only to provide
acknowledgement and where appropriate, document the ways in which the
decision making process gives consideration to the comments. It is often
the case, however, that in their response to comments, the lead agency
will substantively modify or amend their environmental analyses or
project proposal with additional data or mitigation plans in order to
adequately address the submitted comments and avoid litigation. Thus,
the public feedback mechanisms of the EIA process can sometimes shape
both the decision making process, and ultimately, environmental
outcomes.

\[Provide one or two examples of intervention through comments etc
shaping the outcomes\]

Although the public feedback mechanisms within the EIA process can
sometimes help reshape proposed projects or programs, they are less
effective as a means for redirecting or reshaping the underlying
policy-based functional objectives of the proposed actions. Put another
way, public feedback might encourage the lead agency to take measures to
minimize the air, water, soil, and energy impacts of a new prison
construction, but it is unlikely that public feedback in the EIA
process, will, *per se*, have any impact on whether or not the net
number of prison beds is going to increase throughout the state. Written
and oral comments submitted to the lead agency are typically treated in
a *pro forma* fashion such that the lead agency respectfully notes the
comment in the record, but is unlikely to alter their ultimate decision
as a result of it. Although final decisions about funding and
implementing a proposed action are made after an affirmative outcome
from the EIA process, the proposal is likely to have sufficient
political will behind it to see it through long before the EIA process
formally commences.

**Litigation**

The APA provides a legal basis for challenging the lead agency's actions
through judicial review of the documentation, process, and decision
making procedures followed by the lead agency. Such lawsuits typically
occur either after the lead agency approves an environmental assessment
(EA) that declares the proposed project will have little or no adverse
environmental impacts (Finding of No Significant Impact \[FONSI\]), or
after the issuance of one of the EIS reports, from the notice of intent
and scoping documents, through draft EISs, and up to the final revisions
and the record of decision.

The Record of Decision (ROD)[^60] describes the specific components of
the proposed action that are permitted, the rationale for these
decisions, and any mitigation measures or ongoing monitoring activities
upon which the decision depends.

If, after filing comments through the EIA process, individuals or
organizations believe their concerns have not been adequately addressed
in subsequent steps along the EIA process, or if they feel that the plan
of action would in some way cause them direct injury, those individuals
or organizations have the right to file a lawsuit against the lead
agency in a court of law.

There are three primary considerations in the judicial review process
within NEPA, and state action more generally: standing, reviewability,
and court relief. (Czarnezki 2006)

By looking at prison construction as an entry point into examining the
EIA process as a venue for potentially radical organizing efforts, we
can see how the environmental state is inextricably bound to the racial
state.

What are the features of the racial state such that prisons become a
catch-all solution to a range of social, political, and economic crises?

The construction of prisons (and expansion of the means and mechanisms
of criminalization) is a racialized and gendered mechanism for managing
populations rendered as surplus to the nation/state and economy.
Organizing communities in opposition to prison construction around this
understanding is inherently an anti-racist project.

Think about the way that the state provides a platform for civic
engagement.

Poulantzas (2014, pg91):

> “It is precisely through a system of general, abstract and formal rules that law regulates the exercise of power by the state apparatuses, as well as access to these apparatuses themselves. Within a specific form of domination, this legal system controls the process whereby power is apportioned to the various classes and, above all, the distinct fractions of the bourgeoisie that make up a power-bloc. By thus giving order to their mutual relations within the State, it allows a changed balance of forces in the ruling alliance to find expression at state level without provoking upheavals. Capitalist law, as it were, damps down and channels political crises, in such a way that they do not lead to crises of the State itself. More generally, capitalist law appears as the necessary form of a State that has to maintain relative autonomy of the fractions of a power-bloc in order to organize their unity under the hegemony of a given class or fraction. This compulsion is further bound up with the State's relative separation from the relations of production - that is to say, with the fact that agents of the economically dominant class (the bourgeoisie) do not directly coincide with the occupiers and agents of the State.” 

NEPA operates through the interconnected elements of administrative
proceduralism and jurisprudence. Information gathering, scientific
analyses, disclosure and public feedback, and administrative review all
fall under the category of administrative proceduralism. As governance
mechanisms, they require planners, policy makers, and decision makers to
follow established sets of procedures, with the theory being that
informational inputs from a breadth of disciplines and plurality of
sources lead to better administration of programs. Jurisprudence
provides a system of legal checks and balances to the proceduralism.
Judicial review, as well as the threats of costly legal fees, lengthy
delays, and establishing new legal precedents, encourages prudence
within the administrative process. The combined effect of these
governance mechanisms is a structured yet flexible framework for
enabling state sanctioned environmental change. That every environment
is a racialized environment means that NEPA also represents a framework
for reshaping racialized space. Therefore, understanding how the
procedural and juridical elements of NEPA function as platforms for
social justice organizing means \_\_\_.

**Conclusion**

The Delano campaign demonstrates the conceptual flexibility of an
environmental justice framework for engaging the racial environmental
state through the environmental impact assessment (EIA) process mandated
by state and federal environmental policies. The malleability of EIA
allowed organizers to stretch the concept of environment, and thus, the
social justice organizing capacities around racialized space, by linking
the prison infrastructure to its social-environmental impacts. In turn,
this facilitated discussions about the broader impacts of the prison
between residents, local and state government officials, environmental
justice advocates, and prison abolitionists. Together, these unlikely
allies formed a loose coalition cohered in their opposition to the
prison and the conversion of farmland into carceral space[^61].

Down but not out, the campaign organizers switched their efforts from
the legal strategy based around the prison's environmental impact to a
legislative strategy aimed at stopping the prison from being funded.
\[Add descriptive stuff about the campaign in Sacramento\]\[ Did this
grow out of the lawsuit and EIS campaign, or was it always part of the
plan?\]

Despite the hard fought battle in the courts and statehouse,
construction of Delano II proceeded, and it began accepting inmates in
June 2005 as Kern Valley State Prison. But this outcome is not the end
of the story. Kern Valley State Prison was the last large-scale state
prison built as part of the California prison boom. It capped the
largest prison expansion in US history--a quarter century that witnessed
the prison system grow from a dozen prisons and 23,000 inmates, to add
33 prisons and 140,000 additional inmates at its peak in 2006. Although
prison expansions and infill housing have continued to ameliorate the
severe overcrowding and insufficient capacities for medical care, new
construction ended. While this is not a direct result of the campaign
against the Delano prison, the Delano II campaign helped raise broad
awareness of the social and environmental justice implications of prison
expansion, and thus served as an important component within statewide
efforts to curtail prison expansion and incarceration rates. The
four-year delay caused by the Delano II campaign ensured that by the
time inmates began arriving at Kern Valley State Prison, it would be the
last time until the corrections system underwent massive changes.

Indeed, the end of the prison boom came about as a result of a
combination of factors including massive campaigning by prisoners, their
families, prison reform advocates, and prison abolitionists; chronic
state budgetary crises coupled with increasing incarceration costs
throughout the 2000s; and a complex series of court actions around the
case *Plata v. Brown* that surfaced a court order in 2005 limiting the
California prison population, legislation intended to reduce prison
overcrowding, and ultimately, a Supreme Court ruling in 2010 upholding
the state court's mandates. \[Maybe some other stuff about realignment
and the case for abolition, but need to bring it back to EIA and the
environment. Segue to the ecology of prisons…\]

One of the insidious ways in which the discourse about anthropogenic
climate change complicates environmental justice work is that it tends
to substitute the language of “greening” for justice. Growing concern
over the future of human society in the face of precipitous climate
change means that concern about any issues related to the environment
become synonymous with a concern about climate change, a concern over
the release of greenhouse gases into the upper atmosphere, or in the
extreme, simply a concern with the vague and amorphous concept of
“sustainability.” The effect of this discourse is two fold. First, it
enables the “greenwashing” of projects, meaning that a “green” or
“sustainable” veneer gives the impression that a project is immune to
critique on environmental grounds. Second, it sidelines other
understandings of environment and environmental justice. Without
diminishing climate justice concerns, an environmental justice position
considers the project in terms of the social justice implications for
environmental changes that might occur as a result of project
implementation.

Prison construction and expansion projects initiated since the early
2000s are increasingly promoted as green projects, apparently in an
attempt to garner support from local communities, as well as politicians
and bureaucrats at the municipal, state, regional, and national levels.
By promoting a prison project as green and/or sustainable, project
promoters are able to minimize concerns about the environmental justice
implications of the project and the specific geographical siting of the
project. Developers are likely also taking advantage of green building
incentives, such as tax credits and exemptions (e.g., Qualified Energy
Conservation Bonds \[QECBs\]), or to meet municipal building regulations
(e.g., Los Angeles County's LEED silver requirement for county
buildings).

Despite the claims of green prisons as being environmentally friendly,
there remain numerous critiques of prison construction from both
ecological and environmental justice perspectives. First is the direct
environmental impact of prison construction on the localized
ecology--the inevitable impacts on the physical conditions supporting
flora and fauna--whether the project represents new construction or
expansion or renovation of existing facilities. Second are the
proximity-related environmental impacts to soils, groundwater, and air
quality, which disproportionately affect neighboring communities and
incarcerated populations. Third are sociocultural impacts to things like
employment, the local economy, housing and urban planning, as well as
less localized factors like policing practices

**Leveraging the Racial Environmental State**

[^11]:  Yokuts (also Yokote, Yokots, or Yokoch) and Shoshonean are general terms that refer to linguistic families, not specific tribes. Yokuts is a word meaning "people" in most of the Yokuts dialects, while Shoshonean identifies peoples whose dialects derived from the Shoshoni language. Most of the Yokuts peoples were divided into tribes with distinct names and dialects. The area where the City of Delano now sits was primarily inhabited by Paleuyami peoples when the Spanish and Americans settled in the valley. Their neighbors were other Foothill and Valley Yokuts tribes including the Yauelmani, as well as the Shoshonean Giamina.[See @kroeber_yokuts_1907; @kroeber_shoshonean_1907; @kroeber_handbook_1925] 

[^22]:  Gorenfeld, 1999; Menefee and Dodge, 1913

[^23]:  Preston, 1981

[^24]:  Preston, 1981

[^25]:  anon. HISTORY OF THE CHINESE IN CALIFORNIA, no date

[^26]:  {|anon. History | North Kern Cemetery District, no
    date|||zu:336913:MSE582WK}

[^27]:  citation needed

[^28]:  Community Planning Laboratory, 2009; Preston, 1981; Menefee and
    Dodge, 1913

[^29]:  As the census was collected the first week of 1920, this figure
    likely undercounted the migrant farm workers who would pass through
    Delano during picking seasons; footnote: 1930 onward census was
    collected in April, possibly contributing to the big jump in
    population in 1930. California Department of Finance, 2013; US
    Census Bureau, no date

[^30]:  Oakland Museum of California, 2014

[^31]:  The US Federal Bureau of Immigration was the predecessor to the
    US Immigration and Naturalization Service, which in turn was
    succeeded by the Immigration and Customs Enforcement following the
    establishment of the US Department of Homeland Security following
    the September 11, 2001 attacks on the Pentagon in Washington, DC,
    and the World Trade Center in New York City.

[^32]:  Oakland Museum of California, 2014{|anon. INS Records for 1930s
    Mexican Repatriations | USCIS, no date|||zu:336913:9WWN625J}

[^33]:  Gilmore and Gilmore, 2008

[^34]:  California Department of Corrections, 2000; California
    Department of Corrections, 1994

[^35]:  California Department of Corrections, 2000; California
    Department of Corrections, 1995

[^36]: 
    [*http://www.lao.ca.gov/analysis*](http://www.lao.ca.gov/analysis_1995/part1.html)

[^37]: 
    [*https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/monographreports/2006/MR179.pdf*](https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/monograph_reports/2006/MR179.pdf)

[^38]: 
    [*http://www.lao.ca.gov/analysis\_1995/part4-B.html*](http://www.lao.ca.gov/analysis_1995/part4-B.html)

[^39]: 
    [*http://www.lao.ca.gov/1999/99*](http://www.lao.ca.gov/1999/99_budget_features.html)

[^40]:  In the State of California, “urgency legislation” is a term used
    to describe legislation that takes immediate effect once passed by
    the legislature and signed by the governor, and requires a
    two-thirds vote for approval. In the case of budget items, urgency
    legislation can make funds available for immediate appropriation,
    rather than when the full budget is signed by the governor.
    [*http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/guide.html*](http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/guide.html);
    <http://www.dof.ca.gov/fisa/bag/process.htm>

[^41]:  Braz and Gilmore 2006; Friends of the Kangaroo Rat v. CDC 2003;
    Section 15819.295, Chapter 3.1. Lease-Purchase Financing of Prison
    Construction, California Government Code, vol. 15819.1–15819.295,
    accessed September 9, 2015,
    http://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/codes\_displayText.xhtml?lawCode=GOV&division=3.&title=2.&part=10b.&chapter=3.1.

[^42]:  *Section 15819.295, Chapter 3.1. Lease-Purchase Financing of
    Prison Construction, California Government Code, vol.
    15819.1–15819.295, accessed September 9, 2015,
    http://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/codes\_displayText.xhtml?lawCode=GOV&division=3.&title=2.&part=10b.&chapter=3.1.*

[^43]:  Gilmore 2007, 88-127

[^44]:  Gilmore 2007, 100-101

[^45]:  The original EIR evaluated impacts for up to 4,180 inmates on a
    400-acre site, however the certified decision only called for 2,200
    inmates on 320 acres. See CDC 2000 pg. 1-1; CDC 1994.

[^46]:  CEQA Guidelines Section 15105

[^47]:  2000. California Department of Corrections. "Notice of
    Determination: California State Prison - Kern County at Delano II."
    SCH No. 1994022069.

[^48]:  Friends of the Kangaroo Rat v. California Department of
    Corrections, 4 Cal. Rptr. 3d 558 (Court of Appeal, 5th Appellate
    Dist. 2003).

[^49]:  There are 9 major U.S. Supreme Court decisions that establish
    precedent for standing in environmental law (need list and
    citation).

[^50]:  This is related to \[find the case where the potential for an
    increase in crime around a nyc jail was dismissed\]

[^51]:  Perhaps a legal case could be construed such that a plaintiff
    representing prisoners and their families did have standing based on
    impacts to

[^52]:  CEQA guidelines 15131(a). The Guideline reads as follows:

    Economic or social effects of a project shall not be treated as
    significant effects on the environment. An EIR may trace a chain of
    cause and effect from a proposed decision on a project through
    anticipated economic or social changes resulting from the project to
    physical changes caused in turn by the economic or social changes.
    The intermediate economic or social changes need not be analyzed in
    any detail greater than necessary to trace the chain of cause and
    effect. The focus of the analysis shall be on the physical changes.

[^53]: CEQA guidelines 15131(b-c); 40 CFR 1508.14 - HUMAN ENVIRONMENT.
    Citizens Assn. for Sensible Dev v. County of Inyo, 172 Cal. App. 3d
    151 (Court of Appeal, 4th Appellate Dist., 2nd Div. 1985). Citizens
    for Quality Growth v. City of Mt. Shasta, 198 Cal. App. 3d 433
    (Court of Appeal, 3rd Appellate Dist. 1988). c.f. Metropolitan Ed.
    v. People Against Nuclear Energy; Baltimore v. NRDC.

    Go back and check Daffron 1975 article further, and Fogleman S.3.6.2

    The Guideline reads as follows:

    §15131(b): Economic or social effects of a project may be used to
    determine the significance of physical changes caused by the
    project. For example, if the construction of a new freeway or rail
    line divides an existing community, the construction would be the
    physical change, but the social effect on the community would be the
    basis for determining that the effect would be significant. As an
    additional example, if the construction of a road and the resulting
    increase in noise in an area disturbed existing religious practices
    in the area, the disturbance of the religious practices could be
    used to determine that the construction and use of the road and the
    resulting noise would be significant effects on the environment. The
    religious practices would need to be analyzed only to the extent to
    show that the increase in traffic and noise would conflict with the
    religious practices. Where an EIR uses economic or social effects to
    determine that a physical change is significant, the EIR shall
    explain the reason for determining that the effect is significant.

    §15131(c): Economic, social, and particularly housing factors shall
    be considered by public agencies together with technological and
    environmental factors in deciding whether changes in a project are
    feasible to reduce or avoid the significant effects on the
    environment identified in the EIR. If information on these factors
    is not contained in the EIR, the information must be added to the
    record in some other manner to allow the agency to consider the
    factors in reaching a decision on the project.(CEQA Guidelines
    Section 15131)

[^54]:  Friends v. CDC \[depublished\]: “One might reasonably argue that
    the water issue raised by the letter in question refers to a
    physical change in the environment, namely, changes in future
    groundwater levels due to well pumping to supply the prison with
    water, which in turn results in an economic effect of the proposed
    prison. However, the chain of causality in the letter does not
    actually engage how the physical changes to groundwater levels or
    surface water supplies impart economic impacts to SSJMUD or its
    customers, only that the changes in water usage and allocation would
    result in potential economic impacts.”

[^55]:  See Safran2004; Bass2014

[^56]:  Cite published case, also maybe the docket record?

[^57]:  e.g., Safran2004; Bass2014; Meserve2011

[^58]:  Bass2014

[^59]:  Rose Braz and Craig Gilmore, “Joining Forces: Prisons and
    Environmental Justice in Recent California Organizing,” *Radical
    History Review* Fall, no. 96 (October 2006): 95–111,
    doi:10.1215/01636545-2006-006.

[^60]:  In the state level California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA),
    the ROD is replaced by the equivalent Notice of Determination (NOD).

[^61]:  (VERIFY)Braz and Gilmore, 2006

# References
